# Overture to *West Side Story* (1957)
by Leonard Bernstein (August 25, 1918&mdash;October 14, 1990)


Leonard Bernstein admitted that the subject of *West Side Story* was "less important than the bigger idea of making a musical that tells a tragic story in musical-comedy terms." The all-star team of Jerome Robbins (choreography), a young Stephen Sondheim (lyrics), Leonard Bernstein (music), and Arthur Laurent (libretto) worked closely together to make such a musical.

Bernstein was very conscious of creating an American musical idiom when he composed *West Side Story*.  Originally titled *East Side Story*, the musical was conceived as a contemporary retelling of the *Romeo and Juliet* story by choreographer/director Robbins in 1949.  Created in the spirit of the Broadway musical comedy, *West Side Story* represented a conceptual change in the genre. *West Side Story* is not the sunny stuff of musicals; it is a bleakly tragic story. Along with Rodgers and Hammerstein's *Oklahoma*, it pointed the way to American musical theater, a genre more diverse than mere musical comedy.  

In *West Side Story*, dance is as important as the word; the energy of the characters' movements expresses what they are unable to say. The musical score is rife with nervous energy; it both speaks for the characters and frames the dance sequences. Bernstein composed music from a variety of genres with equal fluency in  *West Side Story*: opera ("Tonight" ensemble), jazz ("Cool", "Jet Song"), Broadway ("I Feel Pretty", "Gee, Officer Krupke"), and Latin ("Maria", "America").  Bernstein, though he created an American idiom, used Wagner's conception of  *gesamtkunstwerk* ("total artwork": a perfect synthesis of music, dance, poetry) and music-drama in the score.  Although the *potpourri*-style overture gives a thematic overview of the show, it is as integral to the drama as Wagner's preludes. Rather than a cheery curtain raiser, we have grim music foretelling the tragedy to come. 
